---
title: Why hire a community consultant?
author: Jon Ericson
---

I've been a community manager for [a
decade](https://jlericson.com/resume/). While I have some natural
talent, nothing beats experience. It's hard to imagine a better way to
get experience than at Stack Exchange where I worked with dozens of
communities in all stages of development. During that time, I
developed [a model of how communities grow and
mature](https://jlericson.com/2021/08/19/community_startup.html). Not
many people will be able to observe the patterns as closely as I did.

Communities follow the same
[scale](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Power_law) as the Pareto
principle. A small number of communities are large, but the majority
lie somewhere on the long tail. That means for every Stack Overflow,
there are hundreds of Slack servers, GitHub organizations and
Discourse communities. Since hiring a full-time community manager can
cost more than organizations can afford, most communities either do
without or add that task to someone whose regular job is marketing or
customer support or whatever. As a result, most communities lack
experienced guidance.

For very small communities, that's probably fine. Humans handle group
dynamics at a small scale all the time. But when communities get into
the thousands of members (or have ambitions to get that large), they
run into problems with scale that an experienced community manager can
handle. Unfortunately, communities don't start generating enough
revenue to support a full-time community manager until they have
hundreds of thousands members.

To summarize:

1. Small communities (hundreds of members) get by without a dedicated
   community team.
2. Large communities (hundreds of thousands of members) can afford
   community teams.
3. A large number of communities that sit between those extremes need
   a community team, but can't afford one.
   
Here's where community consultants can step in. By hiring a
professional community manager part-time, mid-range communities get
the assistance they need at the price they can afford. This is exactly
why I created Civitas. It allows me to take what I've learned about
community management and share it with organizations who can't afford
an experienced community team.

**Now is a great time** if you are looking for help with a
community. I recently ended my time as [Head of Community at College
Confidential](https://talk.collegeconfidential.com/t/introducing-cc-s-new-head-of-community-cc-sorin/3650152)
so my dance card is mostly clear. In a few months I'll either have a
full client list or be working full time somewhere else. So send me an
email (<a class="u-email"
href="mailto:jon@buildcivitas.com">jon@buildcivitas.com</a>)!

