---
title: Next level community strategy
author: Jon Ericson
header:
  image: /assets/images/chess.jpg 
  teaser: /assets/images/chess.jpg 
---

Whenever I hear the phrase [low-hanging
fruit](https://jlericson.com/2023/06/02/easy_answers.html), I shudder
involuntarily. Same with "quick wins". Far too often an idea presented
as a "quick win" is neither quick nor a winning strategy. Especially
when it comes to communities, winning strategies ignore low-hanging
fruit.

## Learning from old-school AI&mdash;chess computers

When I was in high school I got Genesis Chess Challenger for
Christmas. It's a nice chess board built on top of a sophisticated
chess computer. You press a button hidden under each square to select
a piece and press the button on the destination to show the computer
your move. After thinking about it, the computer signals its move with
LEDs highlighting the row and column. It also had **16 difficulty
levels**. According to [the
manual](http://alain.zanchetta.free.fr/docs/Fidelity/Fidelity_Genesis_EN.pdf):

| Level | Approx. average time per move |
| ----: | ----------------------------: |
|     1 |                         1 sec |
|     2 |                         3 sec |
|     3 |                         5 sec |
| . . . |                         . . . |
|    16 |                 Problem Level |

The 16<sup>th</sup> level is called "Problem Level" because it's
designed for endgame problems with only a few pieces left. The
computer will keep working on the problem until it either finds a
solution or the batteries die.

The other levels correspond to the number of moves the computer will
look ahead before making a decision. Level 1 means it only looks one move
ahead&mdash;its own next move. Level 2 means the computer considers each of
its moves _and_ each of the player's possible responses. I got pretty
good at beating these levels just because I was able to think a move
or two ahead of the computer.

By level 3, the computer puts up a pretty good challenge because
it never makes mistakes and I struggled to plan out my moves further
than the computer. It only gets worse for level 4 and on. The
computer perfectly plans so far ahead that humans can't keep up.

But there's a catch: the further they look ahead, the more time it
takes computers to calculate each move. And since chess tournaments
have time limits (3 minutes per move), my Genesis Chess Challenger
would lose on time to a grandmaster. Winning chess computers require
much more CPU power.

## Loser Level 1

Mature communities inevitably get labeled as "toxic". New users feel
unwelcome and legacy users feel worn out seeing the same newbish
behavior day in and day out. Community managers want more new users,
so they write a post on the site asking the community to be nicer to
the newbs. It never works. Sure, some people agree, but this strategy
alienates many of the community's most valuable contributors.

It's not hard to figure out why it fails: nobody likes to be called
"toxic". Even when the post uses nicer words, nobody is
fooled. Calling out unwelcoming behavior is an obvious solution, but
it's a Level 1 trap. It's a strategy to lose existing members without
helping new members. Thinking about how the community will respond
first is a Level 2 strategy and that's much more likely to work.

Instead of a "quick win", take a little more time to understand the
problem. Do some research. Ask some questions. Maybe you'll find out
that long-term members are tired of seeing the same questions asked
over and over again. That might lead to better solutions such as [a
banner asking people to search the
site](https://meta.discourse.org/t/search-banner/122939) or [surfacing
potential duplicates when people start to
ask](https://meta.stackoverflow.com/questions/268318/why-is-the-this-question-might-exist-search-better-than-the-normal-search).

## Aim for Level 3

Trying to fix the root problems is more likely to work than the naive
solution. But odds are very good your first attempt won't work. Far
too often community managers define success by completed projects
rather than improved outcomes. Instead of iterating, people tend to
want to declare victory when the first solution is done.

I can easily beat a chess computer set to Level 1 because I'm ready
with a response to any move the computer makes. Level 3 community
management means having a plan if an initiative succeeds _or_
fails. Can you fix flaws and try again? Would a different approach
work better? Maybe you still need more research to understand the
problem. Even ideas that succeed can be improved.

## Beware of Level 16

If Level 1 doesn't work and Level 3 is better, why not go to Level 16?
This mistake is not as common as "quick wins", but can be much more
costly. After spending months preparing a plan, there's no energy left
for fixing the problems if it comes up short in execution. There's a
natural tendency to blame the community for not getting on board with
the plan. And people get impatient for progress so they try gathering
that low-hanging fruit for a quick win. That gives you the worst of
Level 1 and Level 16.

Communities are complicated and unpredictable. That's why they are so
interesting! Community managers who hide in their ivory tower and only
come out a few times a year to announce a major change aren't likely
to be successful. But if you can get into a cadence of iteration and
planning ahead a few moves, your community will start to see where you
are going. If you keep it up long enough, the community might even
make your goal their goal too.

That's a next level community strategy.
